---
title: How to Study for the SAT
description: How I Gained 250+ Points and Scored in the 99<sup>th</sup> Percentile
permalink: sat
---
When I first started studying for the SAT, I felt lost. I didn't know what books I should be purchasing, which practice tests I should taking, or how much I should be studying. I thought it would be helpful for me (a high school Junior) to document my SAT studying techniques—even if it will only be helpful for my sister, who will be taking the SAT in the next couple of years (as long as it is still a relevant metric). By no means am I saying my method will work for you or that it is the best way to study for the SAT, but it could be of use to some, since it helped me gain 250+ points from my first practice test in August 2021 (85<sup>th</sup> percentile) to the December 2021 SAT (99<sup>th</sup> percentile). I don't say this to gloat, but to add credibility to this SAT studying technique.

In my mind, there are three layers to studying for the SAT. If you want to score above 1500, you'll need to get to layer 3, since your margin of error is slim.

Of note, most of the following doesn't really apply to the Evidence-Based Reading section because it's different from the other sections. I found it to be much less formulaic, since the main skill is interpreting texts well. It's notoriously difficult to improve. You really just need to read actual books to improve, though doing practice sections can help. I rekindled my love for reading[^1] during "lockdown" in 2020, so the Evidence-Based Reading started out as my strongest section; however, it turned out to be my weakest section on my December 2021 SAT, since my score in that section improved the least.

## Layer 1: Understanding the Content

The first thing I did was make sure I knew how to solve every problem. It's hard to practice when you don't know how to get the right answer. Initially, I took a practice test and went through each problem individually after finishing, marking each answer as correct or incorrect. On incorrectly marked questions, I would check to see if I knew how to get the correct answer. If I didn't, I would (re)learn the material by watching videos I found on the internet[^2]. After this, I grinded out 1,762 free practice problems on [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/sat). During this stage, I would recommend doing a full practice test[^3] on the weekends (at least one every other week, though once a week is better). Completing practice tests in full improves your concentration and allows you to become more familiar with the testing format.

You know you're past layer 1 when you feel stupid every time you get a problem wrong because you know why the right answer is right.

### SAT Books

I bought the book my tutor recommended (more on tutors below), but didn't find it to be too helpful. It is possible that I could have gained more from my SAT book had I spent more time with it. My book—like most, if not all SAT books—was so long that I was honestly overwhelmed to use it. Outside of completing a few assigned problems from my tutor, I only used my book to do extra practice tests after I ran out of the tests provided for free by College Board. I'm inclined to believe that purchasing an SAT book is not necessary, but by all means, buy the one that someone you trust recommends. Maybe it will be exactly what you need.

### SAT Prep Courses

While I didn't take an SAT prep course myself, I think it could be a great option for some people. If you have trouble with self-discipline and focus, an SAT prep course would probably be helpful. If practicing on your own isn't difficult, the cost of an SAT prep course likely does not justify its high price tag.

## Layer 2: Knowing the Types of Questions on the SAT

After doing many practice problems, I noticed patterns in the types of questions covered on the SAT. When seeing a question, I knew the types of answer choices that would be available because the question was similar to many other questions I had already done, just with different "variables." This doesn't apply to the Evidence-Based Reading section.

Improvement in layer 2 mainly comes from doing lots of practice tests. You don't need to set aside 3 hours to complete a full practice test to improve in layer 2. Instead, do one section of a practice test each day. I'd still recommend doing a full practice test on the weekend. Khan Academy is great for layer 1, when you need to practice several of a certain type of problem to ensure you really know how to do it; however, in layer 2, when you don't need to learn any material, taking a practice section is more helpful because it's more realistic. It's one thing to be able to solve a problem having done 5 very similar ones in a row; it's a very different thing to get the question right in the format of an actual SAT.

You know you're past layer 2 when you start reading a question (except for ones on the Evidence-Based Reading section) and already know what College Board wants you to answer (make sure not to rush to the wrong conclusion!).

### SAT Tutors

I found meeting with a tutor to be beneficial during layer 2. I met with my tutor three times (1 hour each time, totaling to 3 hours) and saw an increase of ~100 points on practice math sections. It was definitely time and money well spent. Try learning new material on your own instead of with a tutor if you can help it, since your time with a tutor is better spent elsewhere. My tutor showed how to avoid common mistakes, taught me that I should never feel ambivalent about any two answers, since there will only be one _best_ answer, and gave me tips to better take advantage of the format of the SAT. I also learned how to solve math problems in new, faster ways that weren't taught to me in school. These tips were not obvious to me on my own, but were extremely beneficial in helping me improve my SAT score.

## Layer 3: Pacing

I got to layer 3 only a week or two before I took the December 2021 SAT.

When I first started taking practice tests, I could barely finish a section on time, but after enough practice, I would have enough time to start checking my work for a second time. At this point, I needed to pace myself and slow down. I found I scored better when I took my time when first answering questions, having just enough time to thoroughly check my work than when I rushed through the test and had time to check my work twice, since it was hard to convince myself to meticulously examine my work after already doing it once. To score in the 1500s, it is critical to check your work, since you can't miss many questions.

When you are at the point where need to slow down, there isn't much else you can do to improve besides gaining confidence and calming nerves.

## Timing

I highly recommend taking the SAT in August of the start of your junior year. Because you have plenty of time before you need to submit an SAT score, you can use the August SAT as a super low pressure environment to understand what it feels like to take an SAT. Because this test date is several months earlier than the PSAT, the _only_ opportunity to be selected as a National Merit Finalist, it's even not optimal to peak in August. Instead, try to be most prepared to take the SAT when your school takes the PSAT and schedule a test near that date.

The worst case scenario is really not that bad: you realize you need to study more, but at least you'll be more prepared for your next test and for the PSAT, since you're now more comfortable with the testing environment. The best case scenario is quite good: you don't have to worry about the SAT anymore since you now have a score you are happy with. Either way, there's a positive outcome.

I also found it helpful to bring an analog watch with me to take the SAT. College Board doesn't allow for any watches that make noise (basically all digital watches) or external timing devices[^4], so an analog watch is the only way to mange your time besides hoping there will be a visible clock. Not only did I have peace of mind knowing that I would certainly be able to keep track of time by bringing an analog watch, but I was able to use the watch as a countdown timer by setting it to count down to 12:00 for each section. For example, if a section was 25 minutes long, I would set the watch for 11:35 (make sure to count by 5's so you don't make a silly mistake and think you have more/less time than you actually have).

## Closing

Good luck on your SAT! If you made it this far, you care enough about your SAT that I know you'll study hard and do well. Feel free to [reach out](/contact) with your questions.

## Footnotes

[^1]: Check out my [reading log](/books)!
[^2]: I will note that I had already completed both Algebra II and Trigonometry before studying for the SAT. It will probably be harder to understand all content that could be on the SAT if you have not taken those classes.
[^3]: Take them on paper if you can, since it is more similar to the actual SAT. Khan Academy provides [free PDFs](https://www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/sat/full-length-sat-1/paper-sat-tests/a/full-length-sats-to-take-on-paper) to print. When taking the test, you can't search for a word or easily reference the text like you can online, but you can write on equations when doing math problems.
[^4]: See [College Board's Test Day Checklist](https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/sat/taking-the-test/test-day-checklist)
