---
title: How to Study for the SAT
date: 2022-01-05
description: How I Gained 250+ Points
url: sat
---

When I first started studying for the SAT, I felt lost. I didn't know what books
I should be purchasing, which practice tests I should taking, or how much I
should be studying. I thought it would be helpful for me (a high school Junior)
to document my SAT studying techniques—even if it will only be helpful for my
sister, who will be taking the SAT in the next couple of years (as long as it is
still a relevant metric). By no means am I saying my method will work for you or
that it is the best way to study for the SAT, but it could be of use to some,
since it helped me gain 250+ points from my first practice test in August 2021
(85<sup>th</sup> percentile) to the December 2021 SAT (99<sup>th</sup>
percentile). I don't say this to gloat, but to add credibility to this approach.

In my mind, there are three stages to studying for the SAT. If you want to score
above 1500, you'll need to get to stage 3, since your margin of error is slim.

Of note, it's notoriously difficult to improve the Evidence-Based Reading
section. You really just need to read actual books to do well, though the
methodology described below can help—just to a lesser extent than the other
three sections. I rekindled my love for reading[^reading log] during "lockdown"
in 2020, so the Evidence-Based Reading started out as my strongest section;
however, it turned out to be my weakest section on my December 2021 SAT, since
my score in that section improved the least.

[^reading log]: Check out my [reading log]!

[reading log]: /reading

## Stage 1: Understanding the Content

The first thing I did was make sure I knew how to solve every problem. It's hard
to practice when you don't know how to get the right answer. Initially, I took a
practice test and then went through each problem individually, marking each
answer as correct or incorrect. On incorrectly marked questions, I checked to
see if I knew how to get the correct answer. If I didn't, I would (re)learn the
material by watching videos I found on the internet[^math]. After this, I
grinded out 1,762 free practice problems on [Khan Academy]. During this stage, I
would recommend doing a full practice test[^practice-tests] on the weekends (at
least one every other week, though once a week is better). Completing practice
tests in full improves your concentration and allows you to become more familiar
with the testing format.

[^math]: I will note that I had already completed both Algebra II and
Trigonometry before studying for the SAT. It will probably be harder to
understand all content that could be on the SAT if you have not taken those
classes.

[Khan Academy]: https://www.khanacademy.org/sat

[^practice-tests]: Take them on paper if you can. It is more similar to the
actual SAT. Khan Academy provides [free PDFs] to print. When taking the test,
you can't search for a word or easily reference the text like you can online,
but you can write on equations when doing math problems.

[free PDFs]:
https://www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/sat/full-length-sat-1/paper-sat-tests/a/full-length-sats-to-take-on-paper

You know you're past stage 1 when you feel stupid every time you get a problem
wrong because you know why the right answer is right.

### SAT Books

I bought the book my tutor recommended (more on tutors below), but didn't find
it to be too helpful. It is possible that I could have gained more from my SAT
book had I spent more time with it. My book—like most, if not all SAT books—was
so long that I was honestly overwhelmed by it. Outside of completing a few
assigned problems from my tutor, I only used my book to do extra practice tests
after I ran out of the tests provided for free by College Board. I'm inclined to
believe that purchasing an SAT book is not necessary, but by all means, buy the
one that someone you trust recommends. Maybe it will be exactly what you need.

### SAT Prep Courses

While I didn't take an SAT prep course, I think it could be a great option for
some people. If you have trouble with self-discipline and focus, an SAT prep
course would probably be helpful. If practicing on your own isn't difficult, the
cost of an SAT prep course likely does not justify its high price tag.

## Stage 2: Familiarity With the Test Format

After doing many practice problems, I noticed patterns in the types of questions
covered on the SAT. Upon seeing a question, I immediately knew the type of
answer choices that would be available since I had done many similar practice
problems, just with different "variables."

Improvement in stage 2 mainly comes from doing lots of practice tests. You don't
need to set aside 3 hours to complete a full practice test to improve in stage
2. Instead, do one section of a practice test each day. I'd still recommend
doing a full practice test on the weekend. Khan Academy is great for stage 1,
when you need to practice several of a certain type of problem to ensure you
really know how to do it. However, in stage 2, when you know the material, doing
a practice section is more helpful. It's one thing to be able to solve a problem
having done 5 very similar ones in a row; it's a very different thing to get the
question right in the format of an actual SAT.

You know you're past stage 2 when you start reading a question and already know
what College Board wants you to answer (make sure not to rush to the wrong
conclusion!).

### SAT Tutors

I found meeting with a tutor to be beneficial during stage 2. I met with my
tutor three times (1 hour each time, totaling to 3 hours) and saw an increase of
~100 points on practice math sections. It was definitely time and money well
spent. If you can, try learning new material on your own, instead of with a
tutor, since your time with a tutor can be better spent elsewhere. My tutor
showed how to avoid common mistakes, taught me that I should never feel
ambivalent about any two answers, since there will only be one _best_ answer,
and gave me tips to better take advantage of the format of the SAT. I also
learned how to solve math problems in new, faster ways that weren't taught to me
in school. These tips were not obvious to me on my own, but were extremely
beneficial in helping me improve my SAT score.

## Stage 3: Pacing

I got to stage 3 just a week or two before I took the December 2021 SAT.

When I first started taking practice tests, I could barely finish a section on
time, but after enough practice, I had enough time to partially check my work a
second time. At this point, I needed to pace myself and slow down. I found I
scored better when I took my time when first answering questions, having just
enough time to thoroughly check my work once than when I rushed through the test
and had time to check my work twice. It was hard to convince myself to
meticulously examine my work after having already done it once. To score in the
1500s, it is critical to check your work, since you can't miss many questions.

If you get to the point where you need to slow down, there isn't much else you
can do to improve besides calming nerves and gaining confidence by doing well on
additional practice tests.

## Timing

I highly recommend taking the SAT in August of the start of your junior year.
Because you have plenty of time before you need to submit an SAT score, you can
use the August SAT as a super low pressure environment to understand what it
feels like to take an SAT. Because this test date is several months earlier than
the PSAT, the _only_ opportunity to be selected as a National Merit Finalist, it
may not be optimal to peak in August. Instead, try to peak when your school
takes the PSAT and schedule an SAT close to that date.

The worst case scenario is really not that bad: you realize you need to study
more, but at least you'll be more prepared for your next test and for the PSAT,
since you're now more comfortable with the testing environment. The best case
scenario is quite good: you don't have to worry about the SAT anymore, since
you're happy with your score. Either way, there's a positive outcome.

I also found it helpful to bring an analog watch with me to take the SAT.
College Board doesn't allow for any watches that make noise (basically all
digital watches) or external timing devices[^checklist], so an analog watch is
the only way to mange your time besides hoping there will be a visible clock.
Not only did I have peace of mind knowing that I would certainly be able to keep
track of time by bringing an analog watch, but I was able to use the watch as a
countdown timer by setting it to count down to 12:00 for each section. For
example, if a section was 25 minutes long, I would set the watch for 11:35 (make
sure to count by 5's so you don't make a silly mistake and think you have
more/less time than you actually have).

[^checklist]: See College Board's [SAT Test Day Checklist]

[SAT Test Day Checklist]:
https://collegereadiness.collegeboard.org/sat/taking-the-test/test-day-checklist

## Closing

Good luck on your SAT! If you made it this far, you care enough about your SAT
that I know you'll study hard and do well.
