---
title: The computer access dilemma
date: 2022-04-26
description: Why kids don't know how files work
url: computers
draft: True
---

People can't do stuff on school computers in Robo

Installing packages for AI—cancel lab

Why learn progarmming?

- Statistical analysis
- Make a small tool
  - I wrote boatavg in a day and knew no JavaScript

Finance needs python?

We are just teaching students to be users again—it's just that they layers of
obscurity have shifted.

## [10 years of Raspberry Pi](https://youtu.be/eiwm5TMHIy8) Transcript

Raspberry Pi is something that I guess has its genesis, really in my childhood.
So, I was born in 1978. I had a friend whose name was Martin and he had a
computer in his bedroom, and that computer was called the Acorn Electron. Now
the Acorn Electron was another like Raspberry Pi, a computer designed in
Cambridge in the UK. And he could just write very simple little computer
programs. So he could write that program that says, that gets you to input your
name, so he could type Martin. And it would say, hello Martin. Or I could type
my name, Eben. And it would say, hello Eben. And that was just infuriating to
me that my friend could do this thing. It just seemed like such an attractive
thing to be able to do. I got a BBC Micro eventually of my own. I bought a
secondhand BBC Micro and I had it in my bedroom at home. And I learnt to
program on it, I would program in the lunch times and the break times at
school, I'd program in the evenings at home. So when I went to university, it
was the most natural thing in the world for me to decide that I wanted to go to
university and study computer programming. So, when I arrived in Cambridge,
what I found was that the people I was with, my fellow students, almost all of
them had had that route into computer programming. It hadn't been a matter of
learning about computing at school. We all had this hobbyist route into
computing. I think what we discovered subsequently is we didn't know how lucky
we were. We didn't know. We didn't really know where our students were coming
from. We just knew we had a lot of them and that they knew what they were
doing. And then things changed. By 2004, I was involved in interviewing
undergraduates. I'd gone from being an undergraduate to being what we call a
Director of Studies. And the job of the Director of Studies is to organize the
undergraduate teaching for a subject, and also to go and organize that there
should be more undergraduates. And I still remember going to the office, going
to the tutorial office at St John's College in Cambridge, in the autumn of
2004, and I went to collect my folders. I went to collect, each student has a
folder, and I went to collect my pile of folders. And I was expecting a pile of
folders like this. And what I got was a pile of folders like this. Eight or
nine folders where perhaps I might have expected 30 or 40. And what we came to,
over a period of a couple of years really, there was no moment of blinding
insight, but over the course of a couple of years what we came to realize was
that those machines that I had, that had been my way into computing, those
machines that had been my fellow students way into competing, they'd
disappeared. You know, the BBC Micros, the Commodore 64s, the Sinclair
Spectrums. What had happened? Those general purpose computers as the platform
for computer games, had been replaced by games consoles. And this was the first
part of what I think has been an ongoing trend. We all carry around in our
pockets today, machines which are vastly more powerful, our mobile phones,
machines which are vastly more powerful than the machines of the 1980s. No one
ever bought a games console, no one ever bought a mobile phone, and had that be
their ladder into engineering and computer programming, in the same way that
the BBC Micro was for me and for my friends. I've always described it as a
hypothesis test. And I think it is still a hypothesis test. And the hypothesis
is, if the computers went away and then our students went away, if the
computers come back, maybe our students will come back. And we very quickly
decided that our intervention to try to solve this problem would be that we
would create a computer. Very, very early on we settled on four things that we
wanted this computer to do. We wanted it to be fun actually. And what does fun
mean? Fun means it can play games. Fun means that you can play videos on it.
Fun means you can surf the web on it. But that fun should come with a
frictionless opportunity to go from pure fun, pure consumption, to creation, to
doing something creative yourself. So that was important to us. But what we
wanted was a device that could survive the rough and tumble of being owned by a
child. Finally, we wanted it to be cost effective. We wanted it to be cheap. If
you're gonna ask people to go out and buy a whole special thing in order to
participate in computing, it wouldn't make sense if that thing cost hundreds of
pounds. We built a bunch of different prototypes. So we started off in 2006
with a device, which was actually barely more powerful than the machines from
the 1980s. It was very, what was attractive about that machine? It was about
this size, and you could build it with a soldering iron. It was built on a
piece of veroboard. By 2008 we had a platform which ran Python. That machine
also felt deficient. And the way that that machine felt deficient was that we
had to do everything. You write your own SD card drivers, your own file system,
your own graphics drivers, your own text editor. And so that wasn't gonna work
for us. But by 2010, we had something that felt much more like Raspberry Pi.
What was the big change? We decided we were gonna build our platform around
Linux. So, by the start of 2012 we had something we thought we could make for
the price. On the 29th of February we made Raspberry Pi available for sale, and
we sold 100,000 Raspberry Pi's on the first day. It crashed both our partner's
websites, sold 100,000 on the first day. Now, that was 10 years ago. Time
flies. What does this mean in terms of our metric, people applying to the
university at Cambridge? Well, we've gone from a little over 200 people
applying for a little under 100 places, so roughly a ratio of two to one, to
over 1400 people last year applying to the study of Computer Science at
Cambridge. Its gone from being one of the least competitive subjects to one of
the most competitive subjects. So that's a wonderful thing, that single metric.
There's something like a factor of 40 performance difference between the
Raspberry Pi 4, that we're shipping now, and that Raspberry Pi 1 that we
shipped back in 2012. And the wonderful thing is that we've been able to
deliver that performance increase while holding to the same $35 price point as
Raspberry Pi 1. Raspberry Pi was founded with a mission to put affordable
computing in the hands of people all over the world. We've made a lot of
progress on that in our first 10 years. And really the dream is by the time we
get to our 20th anniversary, that there will be nobody in the world who hasn't
had the opportunity to have a low-cost, high performance, general purpose
computing experience. There we are! Raspberry Pi. Thank you very much.

## Resources

[File not found: A generation that grew up with Google is forcing professors to rethink their lesson plans](https://www.theverge.com/22684730/students-file-folder-directory-structure-education-gen-z)
